hello I'm dr. Scott McKay a veterinarian
with doctors foster and smith i'd like
to share with you a few thoughts on
heartworm disease a very serious but
almost one hundred percent preventable
illness affecting dogs and other pets
the adult heartworm can grow to a length
of 12 to 14 inches they reside in the
large blood vessels leading away from
the heart where they are nourished by
the dog's blood actually the name
heartworm disease is a little misleading
since most of the damage done by this
parasite is in the vessels of the
animals lungs the presence of these
worms and the pulmonary vessels of a dog
causes serious damage two of these blood
vessels it is only in the later stages
of this disease that the worms enter the
chambers of the heart heartworm disease
is now found in all 50 states and if
left untreated this disease is fatal the
best protection against heartworm
disease for your pet is the year-round
use of a heartworm preventative even in
areas where mosquitoes which transmit
this parasite only occur seasonally some
heartworm preventative medications also
control intestinal parasites such as
round worms and hook worms which can
infect people let's take an illustrated
look at the life cycle of the hard work
since heartworm disease was first
recognized in the United States there's
been a continual spread throughout the
country of this potentially fatal
disease in dogs the primary targets for
the heartworm parasite are dogs and
their wild cousins such as coyotes
wolves and foxes cats can also get
life-threatening infections with heart
worms cats don't typically spread
infection back to the intermediate hosts
the mosquito mosquitoes are necessary to
spread heartworm disease from animal to
animal fortunately heartworm disease is
entirely preventable adult heart worms
which can reach one foot in length are
found in the heart and nearby blood
vessels where they damage the vessels
and reproduce after mating female
heartworms produce thousands of tiny
larvae called microfilaria these
microfilaria circulate throughout the
body
in blood vessels including the
capillaries under the skin where they
are available to be ingested by
mosquitoes across the u.s. there are
many species of mosquitoes that are
capable of transmitting heartworms dogs
are common targets of mosquitoes as
heart worm infections occur in animals
kept both indoors and outdoors the
mosquito while taking a blood meal
ingest microfilaria from an infected
dog's blood the engorged mosquito is now
infected with microfilaria these
immature heart worm larvae continue
their development inside the mosquito
the microfilaria enter the body cavity
of the mosquito where they develop over
the next 10 to 14 days before this
mosquito can infect another dog these
larvae must undergo this development
phase as the microfilaria mature and
become infective larvae they migrate to
the mouth parts of the mosquito to be in
position to infect another host the life
cycle is continued when the infected
mosquito takes another blood meal from
either the same dog or another dog as
the mosquito prepares to take a blood
meal a fascinating chain of events
occurs to feed the needle-like stylet
penetrates the skin and the protective
labium or lip of the mosquito flexes as
the mosquito feeds infective larvae
erupt through the tip of the labium and
are deposited on the surface of the skin
after the mosquito withdraws its stylet
the infective larvae entered the dog
through the bite wound in the dog's skin
the heart worm larvae developed while
migrating through the dogs connective
tissue this process takes approximately
three to four months during this time
the larvae which were microscopic
developed to be approximately one half
to three quarters of an inch in length
after this tissue development stage the
larvae migrate to a nearby vein and
burrow in once inside the flowing blood
carries them to the heart and major
blood vessels within the lungs once
these young heart worms reach the heart
and large vessels of the lung they are
in the perfect environment for their
continued growth and development the
gentle flow of blood through the vessels
of the lung makes it easy for the
young heart worms to swim move about and
cause mechanical damage to the vessel
walls the nutrient-rich blood provides
an ideal food source promoting the rapid
growth of the young heart worms to their
adult size since heartworms may develop
to be up to a foot in length and large
numbers can infect a single dog these
worms can cause health problems coughing
and difficulty breathing and may lead to
death of the infected animal once mature
the heartworms breed and the female
begins to reproduce live young the
lifecycle is now complete and another
dog is now capable of infecting more
mosquitos causing further spread of this
disease the American Heart room Society
recommends that all dogs be tested for
heartworm disease before beginning a
heartworm preventative program in
addition dog should be retested on an
annual basis to make sure the preventive
program is working if test results
indicate that your dog has heartworm
disease a treatment protocol including a
powerful medication is usually
prescribed to kill the adult heartworms
this treatment involves a hospital stay
during which the medication is given in
a series of injections after treatment
the dog must be kept very quiet for
several weeks to avoid complications as
the adult heartworms die in very serious
infections adult heart worms can be
removed surgically from the dog's heart
heartworm disease is a serious condition
that fortunately is preventable indeed
prevention is much easier safer and less
expensive than treatment if your dog is
not currently on a heartworm
preventative talk with your veterinarian
today about the prevention of this
disease
you